---
layout: post
title:  "On The Road to TDD - Part 1: Testing"
date:   2017-03-01 10:10:45 -0800
categories: intro
image: code01.jpg
author: "Sean Hornsby"
---

{{ page.title }}
================
{{author}}

Testing, and test driven development (TDD), is a tremendously complicated topic for something so simple.
It took me working through three projects in school and one website build professionally to understand what
problems I would be solving by using TDD.

One of the big issues I had was all the scaffolding involved with testing, at least for every tutorial I read.
Pick a test runner, pick an assertion library, write an npm script or gulp file or... None of that made any sense
at the time. Trying to figure all of that out and wrap my head around test writing made me feel like I was wasting 
time I should have been using to write code.

So I am going to dispense with all of those choices, or at least put them off until later. Node comes with 
a perfectly acceptable assertion library called, easily enough, assert. The only think that is required to 
start using it is
```javascript
var assert = require('assert')
```
Once that is done you are ready to write tests... well, almost. There are two broad topics to cover, how to write
a test and what to test. Let's take those in reverse order.

(If you haven't read the posts on extending array to include .numericSort(), they are here and here. Not necessary, 
but that's what we're going to be testing.)

When we were figuring out how to extend Array to include a numeric sort, we had some very clear goals. That is the best
place to start with tests. When we get further on, we will understand that how we determine these goals is an important part of the process.
For now, we will just be glad they were easy to figure out for this situation. Sometimes they are obvious, sometimes you need
to mull it over, and sometimes you let the act of writing tests clarify those goals. But starting with clear goals is easiest.

Our goal was to take an array of numbers, give that to a function, and get back an array of numbers sorted in ascending order.
In plain language we could say, I want to input [15, 10, 5, 89, -3, 0] and get [-3, 0, 5, 10, 15, 89]. Well look at that, we wrote a test.
Without an assertion function, we might eyeball our tests. It's what we did in the previous posts.
```javascript
console.log([15, 10, 5, 89, -3, 0].numericSort()); // [-3, 0, 5, 10, 15, 89]
```
Run the function, look at the results, see if it makes sense. Console.log debugging is ubiquitous, easy, intuitive. It works in the immediate
case. It doesn't work as a long term solution, for many reasons. Running actual tests is nearly as simple and has added benefits.

Now we know what test we want to write, how do we write it? Test syntax is a bit wordy, but once you've done it a few times it become rote.
Here's what that test looks like.
```javascript
// numericSort.test.js
// ...
describe('Sort tests', function() {
  describe('ascending numeric tests', function() {
    it('should return an array with the numbers sorted in ascending order', function(){
      var result = [15, 10, 5, 89, -3, 0].numericSort();
      assert.deepEqual(result, [-3, 0, 5, 10, 15, 89];
    })
  })
})
```

Describe is going to output some human readable text after the tests are run. Here we are using two, the first describe is for the complete
block of tests we will likely end up with (you'll see), and the second one describes an inner block of tests for a certain feature path.
Finally the test is wrapped with an "it" statement that describes the specific test. It is common practice to write test descriptions in plain
langauge starting with should. **_This makes the test intent easily readable._** Inside the it block we do two things. Run the function and test the result.
Assert comes with chainable methods. Here we are using deepEqual (not equal, because we need to test the contents of the object). We pass deepEqual
two parameters, the thing we want to test, and the expected result.

You may be wondering something, something I wondered when I first started programming and first started looking into TDD.
Running this file (node numericSort.test.js) quickly points out a huge flaw.
```javascript
TypeError: [15, 10, 5, 89, -3, 0].numericSort is not a function
```
That's ok, this is a good thing. We have adhered to the guiding tennant of most TDD philosohies. Write a failing test. That's all well and good.
Hooray us! But how do we move forward? Well, we write a numericSort function, AND, we require it in the test suite. Here is what that looks like:
```javascript
// numericSort.js
module.exports = function() {
  if(!Array.prototype.numericSort) {
    Array.prototype.numericSort = function() {}
  }
}
// numericSort.test.js
var assert = require('assert');
require('./numericSort')();

describe('Sort tests', function() {
  ...
```
For a long time, the idea of exporting and importing modules was outside of my ken. I didn't see the magic. Hopefully you do. You can get by learning TDD
without it, but it won't be very usefull. So we run the test again. It shouldn't be a big surprise when it fails again. Our function doesn't do anything.
It doesn't even return anything. So we will get back a failure along the lines of "undefined not equal to [-3, 0, 5, 10, 15, 89]."

Can you think of a simple way to fix this? Think simpler. Even simpler. Stupid simple.

```javascript
// numericSort.js
module.exports = function() {
  if(!Array.prototype.numericSort) {
    Array.prototype.numericSort = function() {
      return [-3, 0, 5, 10, 15, 89];
    }
  }
}
```
"That's cheating!" Yeah, but listen, it's the simplest way to make the test pass. Don't believe me? Run the test. See that green checkmark? You did it!
Still don't feel good about it? Here's the next step. Write another test that you know will fail (but still meets the business requirements). Take a minute
and see what you come up with. Here's mine:
```javascript
// numericSort.test.js
// ...
describe('Sort tests', function() {
  describe('ascending numeric tests', function() {
    it('should return an array with the numbers sorted in ascending order', function(){
      var result = [15, 10, 5, 89, -3, 0].numericSort();
      assert.deepEqual(result, [-3, 0, 5, 10, 15, 89];
    })
    it('should return an array with the numbers sorted in ascending order', function(){
      var result = [5,4,3,2,1].numericSort();
      assert.deepEqual(result, [1,2,3,4,5];
    })
  })
})
```
This time when we run the tests, we get one passing, one failing. "AssertionError: [-3, 0, 5, 10, 15, 89] deepEqual [1,2,3,4,5]." 
So much for our dead simple implementation. Looks like we're going to have to actually write a sorting function. "Wait," you say,
"can't we just check if the input is [5,4,3,2,1] and force it to return the right value?" Now you're thinking in TDD! We could. Maybe
we should. But we could also look ahead to the time when it is more complicated to handle every test value than to just write the
correct code. Let's wrap this up and then talk about why we should bother.
```javascript
// numericSort.js
module.exports = function() {
  if(!Array.prototype.numericSort) {
    Array.prototype.numericSort = function() {
      if(this == null) {
        throw new TypeError('this is null or not defined');
      }
      var O = Object(this);
      return O.sort( ( a, b ) => a - b);
    }
  }
}
```
Now we run the tests, they both pass, maybe we think of other tests. Try more numbers or larger numbers. At some point
you will be satisfied that your code does what you expect it to do. We did it, you did it! "But," you may be thinking,
"I could have written that code without all the overhead of TDD. "Heck," you say, "I spent more time writing tests than
I did writing the code. Seems wasteful." Let me explain what you bought yourself with that time investment. Safety. Go back
and mess with your code. Add functionality like reverse sort. Add error handling. Add type validation. As long as your tests pass,
you will know that your tinkering didn't break functionality.